What is the purpose of JDK and JRE? The JDK (Java Development Kit) provides tools to develop Java applications, including the compiler and debugger. The JRE (Java Runtime Environment) allows users to run Java applications by providing the necessary libraries and JVM.

Why is Java platform independent? Java is platform-independent because its compiler converts source code into bytecode, which can run on any system with a compatible JVM. This "write once, run anywhere" capability is achieved through the JVM's abstraction over underlying hardware.

Mention any two key features of Java. Java is object-oriented, promoting modular and reusable code. It also supports multithreading, allowing concurrent execution of two or more threads.

What is the purpose of JVM? The JVM (Java Virtual Machine) executes Java bytecode, enabling Java applications to run on any device or operating system. It provides platform independence and manages system resources for Java programs.

State the syntax of declaring a variable in Java. The syntax is: type variableName = value; For example: int age = 25;

What is the difference between int and float data types? int is used for whole numbers without decimals, while float is used for numbers with fractional parts. Both are 32-bit types but represent data differently.

What is a constant in Java? Give an example. A constant is a variable whose value cannot change once assigned, declared using final. Example: final double PI = 3.14159;

Define implicit and explicit type casting. Implicit casting automatically converts a smaller type to a larger type (e.g., int to double). Explicit casting requires manual conversion, often from a larger type to a smaller type (e.g., double to int).

What is the output of: System.out.println(10 % 3);? The output is 1, as % returns the remainder of the division.

Differentiate between = and == operators. = is the assignment operator, used to assign values to variables. == is the equality operator, used to compare two values or references.

Write syntax for an if statement in Java. The syntax is:
java

if (condition) {
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
``` :contentReference[oaicite:9]{index=9}

State the difference between while and do-while loop. A while loop checks the condition before executing the loop body, possibly not executing at all. A do-while loop executes the loop body at least once before checking the condition.

What is the use of break statement? The break statement terminates the nearest enclosing loop or switch statement immediately. It transfers control to the statement following the terminated block.

Write any two string methods in Java. length() returns the number of characters in a string. substring(int beginIndex, int endIndex) returns a new string that is a substring of the original.

What is a method signature? A method signature includes the method's name and the parameter types in order. It uniquely identifies a method within a class.

Define method overloading. Method overloading allows multiple methods in the same class to have the same name but different parameter lists. It enables methods to handle different types or numbers of inputs.

What is an abstract method? An abstract method is declared without an implementation and must be overridden in a subclass. It's used to define methods that should be implemented by derived classes.

What is a static method? A static method belongs to the class rather than any instance and can be called without creating an object. It's defined using the static keyword.

Define instance method. An instance method belongs to an object of a class and can access instance variables and other instance methods. It requires creating an object to be invoked.

Give the syntax to declare a one-dimensional array. The syntax is: type[] arrayName = new type[size]; Example: int[] numbers = new int[5];

Write one difference between ArrayList and HashSet. ArrayList maintains the insertion order and allows duplicate elements. HashSet does not guarantee order and does not allow duplicates.

What is the use of Collections.enumeration()? Collections.enumeration() converts a collection into an enumeration, which can be used to iterate through the elements. It's useful for legacy APIs that require enumeration objects.
